README.md, before:

<h1 align="center" >  Dessert Release App  <br> [ ᴀɴᴅʀᴏɪᴅ ♾ ᴅᴇᴍᴏ ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ ]</h1>

## ɪ  ⁃  ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ ɪɴꜰᴏ

The Dessert Release app is a simple app which displays a collection of Android dessert releases. This app is used to teach the concept of Preferences DataStore.
<br>

<div align="center">

⁃ ᴄᴏɴᴛᴇɴᴛꜱ ⁃  
[ᴜꜱᴇʀ ꜰᴇᴀᴛᴜʀᴇꜱ](#ɪɪ--ᴡʜᴀᴛ-ᴜꜱᴇʀꜱ-ᴄᴀɴ-ᴇxᴘᴇᴄᴛ)
| [ᴀᴘᴘ ꜱᴄʀᴇᴇɴꜱ](#ɪɪɪ--ᴠɪꜱᴜᴀʟ-ᴛᴏᴜʀ-ᴏꜰ-ᴛʜᴇ-ᴀᴘᴘ-ꜱᴄʀᴇᴇɴꜱ)
| [ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ ʙʀᴀɴᴄʜᴇꜱ](#ɪᴠ--ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ-ʙʀᴀɴᴄʜᴇꜱ)
| [ᴅᴇᴠ ꜰᴇᴀᴛᴜʀᴇꜱ](#ᴠ--ʙᴇʜɪɴᴅ-ᴛʜᴇ-ᴄᴏᴅᴇ-ᴅᴇᴠ-ꜰᴇᴀᴛᴜʀᴇꜱ)
| [ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ ɴᴏᴛᴇꜱ](#ᴠɪ--ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ-ɴᴏᴛᴇꜱ)

<br>
<br>

[![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/-Android%20|%20Platform-2E8B57?logo=android&logoColor=white&style=for-the-badge)](#)
[![Language](https://img.shields.io/badge/-Kotlin%20|%20Language-%2307405e?logo=kotlin&logoColor=white&style=for-the-badge)](#)

[![MIN API LEVEL](https://img.shields.io/badge/-MIN%20SDK%20|%2024-1C1E24?logo=planetscale&logoColor=00C7B7&style=for-the-badge)](#)
[![Target Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/-Target%20SDK%20|%2034-1C1E24?logo=planetscale&logoColor=00C7B7&style=for-the-badge)](#)
[![Architecture](https://img.shields.io/badge/-Architecture%20|%20MVI-1C1E24?logo=planetscale&logoColor=00C7B7&style=for-the-badge)](#)
[![UI](https://img.shields.io/badge/-UI%20|%20Jetpack%20Compose-1C1E24?logo=planetscale&logoColor=00C7B7&style=for-the-badge)](#)

<br>
<br>
<img
    src="./screenshots/alpha_main.png"
    width="340" height="720" 
/>

<br>

</div>


## ɪɪ ⁃ ᴡʜᴀᴛ ᴜꜱᴇʀꜱ ᴄᴀɴ ᴇxᴘᴇᴄᴛ

### ⭓ Features


1. Add Items
    - Users can add new inventory items to the local database.
    - The form may include fields like item name, quantity, price, description, etc.


##
### ⭓ Requirements
- Android 7.0 and Above
- Min SDK version 24


##
### ⭓ Permissions
- N/A

<hr>

## ɪɪɪ ⁃ ᴠɪꜱᴜᴀʟ ᴛᴏᴜʀ ᴏꜰ ᴛʜᴇ ᴀᴘᴘ: ꜱᴄʀᴇᴇɴꜱ

<p align="center">
<img 
  src="./screenshots/alpha_main.png" 
   width="200" height="460" 
  />
<img 
  src="./screenshots/screenshot_main.png" 
  width="200" height="460" 
  />
</p>



#
<div align="center">


![forthebadge](https://forthebadge.com/images/badges/built-with-love.svg)
![ForTheBadge ANDROID](https://forthebadge.com/images/badges/built-for-android.svg)
![ForTheBadge GIT](https://forthebadge.com/images/badges/uses-git.svg)

  <br>

<kbd>[&nbsp; ⮝ &nbsp;  BACK TO TOP  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;](#ɪ----ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ-ɪɴꜰᴏ) </kbd>
</div>


#
## ɪᴠ ⁃ ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ ʙʀᴀɴᴄʜᴇꜱ

<!-- Main / Master / Production Branch -->

> <samp> **PRODUCTION BRANCH :**  </samp>  
> Stable code for deployment  
> ➲ [main][branch-main]

> <samp> **STAGING BRANCH :**  </samp>  
> `FLOW | Staging → Production`  
> For pre-release testing, which ensures that the code is stable, bug-free, and ready for deployment.  
> ➲ [staging][branch-staging]

> <samp> **DEVELOPMENT BRANCH :**  </samp>  
> `FLOW | Development → Release → Staging → Production`  
> Active codebase for ongoing development efforts  (New features, bug fixes, and improvements..)  
> ➲ [development][branch-development]



> <samp> **FEATURE BRANCHES :** N/A  </samp>  
> `FLOW | Feature → Development → Release → Staging → Production`  
<!-- 
> <samp> **FEATURE BRANCHES :**  </samp>  
> For Isolated feature development (Ensures changes are tested and reviewed before merging into the main workflow)  
>   
> feature/  
> ➲ dark-theme  
> ➲ offline-db-impl
-->


> <samp> **RELEASE BRANCHES :** N/A  </samp>  
> `FLOW | Release → Staging → Production`  
<!-- 
> <samp> **RELEASE BRANCHES :**  </samp>  
> Prepares the code for final testing and deployment in a new version release.
>   
> release/  
> ➲ version-number
-->



> <samp> **HOTFIX BRANCHES :** N/A  </samp>  
> `FLOW | Hotfix → Staging → Production`  
<!-- 
> <samp> **HOTFIX BRANCHES :**  </samp>  
> Handles critical fixes in production that need immediate resolution.
>   
> hotfix/  
> ➲ main-screen-crash 
-->


> <samp> **BUGFIX BRANCHES :** N/A  </samp>  
> `FLOW | Bugfix → Development → Release → Staging → Production` 
<!-- 
> <samp> **BUGFIX BRANCHES :**  </samp>  
> Addresses specific bugs identified during development and testing.
>   
> bugfix/  
> ➲ main-screen-error
-->

<!-- 
> <samp> **EXPERIMENTAL BRANCHES :** N/A  </samp>  

> <samp> **EXPERIMENTAL BRANCHES :**  </samp>  
> Facilitates trial and error to test new ideas and concepts.
>   
> experiment/  
> ➲ main-screen-change-colours
-->
<!-- Experimental → Feature → Development → Release → Staging → Main/Production   -->


[branch-main]:  https://github.com/dizzcode/inventory-android-test-app/tree/main
[branch-development]:  https://github.com/dizzcode/inventory-android-test-app/tree/development
[branch-staging]:  https://github.com/dizzcode/inventory-android-test-app/tree/staging

[branch-feature-NAME]:  https://github.com/dizzcode/inventory-android-test-app/tree/staging

[branch-hotfix-NAME]:  https://github.com/dizzcode/inventory-android-test-app/tree/staging

[branch-bugfix-NAME]:  https://github.com/dizzcode/inventory-android-test-app/tree/staging

<br>  


#
## ᴠ ⁃ ʙᴇʜɪɴᴅ ᴛʜᴇ ᴄᴏᴅᴇ: ᴅᴇᴠ ꜰᴇᴀᴛᴜʀᴇꜱ

### ⭓ App Dependencies/Libraries Overview

<br>

* [Kotlin][0] : Kotlin is statically typed & first-class language for Android Development.
* [Coroutines][1] : For Asynchronus or non-blocking operations.
* [Flows][2] : Data Streaming API which is built on top of Coroutines.
* [Jetpack Compose][3] : Toolkit for building native UI in a declarative way.
* [Room][4] : Save data in a local database using Room
* [Retrofit][5] : Type-safe REST client for Android to consume RESTful web services.
* [Dagger Hilt][6] : Dependency injection library for Android.
* [Kotlin DSL][7] : For writing gradle script for Kotlin is more readable and offers better compile-time.

[0]:  https://kotlinlang.org/
[1]:  https://kotlinlang.org/docs/coroutines-overview.html
[2]:  https://developer.android.com/kotlin/flow
[3]:  https://developer.android.com/jetpack/compose
[4]:  https://developer.android.com/training/data-storage/room
[5]:  https://github.com/square/retrofit
[6]:  https://dagger.dev/hilt/
[7]:  https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/kotlin_dsl.html


#
### ⭓ Features

1. DataStore &nbsp;|&nbsp;  [ More-> ](#1-datastore)  


<br>
<br>  
<br>  

#
<div align="center">

<kbd>[&nbsp; ⮝ &nbsp;  BACK TO TOP  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;](#ɪ----ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ-ɪɴꜰᴏ) </kbd>
</div>

#
# ᴠɪ ⁃ ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ ɴᴏᴛᴇꜱ

<br> 

____

## 1. DataStore

<br>  

#
### 1.1 How to add DataStore library to the app

Set up dependencies | inside `build.gradle.kts` (Module :app)

```kotlin
//DataStore
implementation("androidx.datastore:datastore-preferences:1.0.0")
```

<br>  

#
### 1.2 Implement the user preferences repository

- In the `data` package, create a new class called `UserPreferencesRepository.kt`
- In the `UserPreferencesRepository` constructor, define a private value property to represent a `DataStore` object instance with a `Preferences` type.

```kotlin
class UserPreferencesRepository(
    private val dataStore: DataStore<Preferences>
){
}
```

#
> [!IMPORTANT]  
> Make sure to use the `androidx.datastore.preferences.core.Preferences` import for the Preferences class.
> #
> DataStore stores key-value pairs. To access a value you must define a key.
> #

<br>

- Create a `companion object` inside the UserPreferencesRepository class.
- Use the `booleanPreferencesKey()` function to define a key and pass it the name is_linear_layout. 
  - Similar to SQL table names, the key needs to use an underscore format. 
  - This key is used to access a boolean value indicating whether the linear layout should be shown.

```kotlin
class UserPreferencesRepository(
    private val dataStore: DataStore<Preferences>
){
    private companion object {
        val IS_LINEAR_LAYOUT = booleanPreferencesKey("is_linear_layout")
    }
    // ...
}
```

<br>  

#
### 1.3 Write to the DataStore

- You create and modify the values within a DataStore by passing a lambda to the `edit()` method.
The lambda is passed an instance of MutablePreferences, which you can use to update values in the DataStore.
- All the updates inside this lambda are executed as a single transaction.
  - Put another way, the update is atomic - it happens all at one time. This type of update prevents a situation in which some values update but others do not. 

<br>

- Create a suspend function and call it saveLayoutPreference().

- In the saveLayoutPreference() function, call the edit() method on the dataStore object.

- To make your code more readable, define a name for the MutablePreferences provided in the lambda body. Use that property to set a value with the key you defined and the boolean passed to the saveLayoutPreference() function.

```kotlin
suspend fun saveLayoutPreference(isLinearLayout: Boolean) {
    dataStore.edit { preferences ->
        preferences[IS_LINEAR_LAYOUT] = isLinearLayout
    }
}
```

#
> [!IMPORTANT]  
> #
> The value does not exist in DataStore until this function is called and the value is set.  
> By setting up the key-value pair in the edit() method,  
> the value is defined and initialized until the app's cache or data is cleared.
> #


<br>  

#
### 1.4 Read from the DataStore

Now that you have created a way to write isLinearLayout into dataStore, take the following steps to read it:

- Create a property in UserPreferencesRepository of type Flow<Boolean> called isLinearLayout.
- You can use the DataStore.data property to expose DataStore values. Set isLinearLayout to the data property of the DataStore object.
- Use the map function to convert the Flow<Preferences> into a Flow<Boolean>.
- Specify true to default to the linear layout view.
- 
```kotlin
val isLinearLayout: Flow<Boolean> = dataStore.data.map { preferences ->
    preferences[IS_LINEAR_LAYOUT] ?: true
}
```

#
> [!NOTE]
> #
>  The Preferences object contains all the key-value pairs in the DataStore.  
> Each time the data in the DataStore is updated, a new Preferences object is emitted into the Flow.
> #
> Remember that until the preference is defined and initialized, it does not exist in the DataStore.  
> That is why you must programmatically confirm that the preference exists and provide a default value if it does not.
> #

<br>  

#
### 1.5 Exception handling

File system interactions can fail, such as missing files or full/unmounted disks. DataStore read/write operations may trigger IOExceptions. Use the catch{} operator to handle these failures

- In the companion object, implement an immutable TAG string property to use for logging.

```kotlin
suspend fun saveLayoutPreference(isLinearLayout: Boolean) {
    dataStore.edit { preferences ->
        preferences[IS_LINEAR_LAYOUT] = isLinearLayout
        const val TAG = "UserPreferencesRepo" //Added
    }
}
```

<br>

- Preferences DataStore throws an IOException when an error is encountered while reading data. In the isLinearLayout initialization block, before map(), use the catch{}operator to catch the IOException.

```kotlin
val isLinearLayout: Flow<Boolean> = dataStore.data
    .catch {} //Added
    .map { preferences ->
        preferences[IS_LINEAR_LAYOUT] ?: true
    }
```
<br>

- In the catch block, if there is an IOexception, log the error and emit emptyPreferences(). If a different type of exception is thrown, prefer re-throwing that exception. By emitting emptyPreferences() if there is an error, the map function can still map to the default value.

```kotlin
val isLinearLayout: Flow<Boolean> = dataStore.data
    .catch { // -------------- Added
        if(it is IOException) {
            Log.e(TAG, "Error reading preferences.", it)
            emit(emptyPreferences())
        } else {
            throw it
        }
    } // -------------- Added
    .map { preferences ->
        preferences[IS_LINEAR_LAYOUT] ?: true
    }
```
[ View Full Code --> ](./app/src/main/java/dizzcode/com/dessertrelease/data/local/UserPreferencesRepository.kt)

<br>  

#
### 1.6 Initialize the DataStore

In this project, you must handle the dependency injection manually.  
Therefore, you must manually provide the UserPreferencesRepository class with a Preferences DataStore.  
Follow these steps to inject DataStore into the UserPreferencesRepository.

- Find the dessertrelease package.


- Within this directory, create a new class called DessertReleaseApplication and implement the Application class. This is the container for your DataStore.

```kotlin
class DessertReleaseApplication: Application() {
}
```

- In DessertReleaseApplication.kt, declare a private const val LAYOUT_PREFERENCE_NAME outside the class and set its value to "layout_preferences" for use in the Preferences Datastore.


- In DessertReleaseApplication.kt, outside the DessertReleaseApplication class, create a private DataStore<Preferences> property called Context.dataStore using the preferencesDataStore delegate, and pass LAYOUT_PREFERENCE_NAME as the name parameter.

```kotlin
//Added
private const val LAYOUT_PREFERENCE_NAME = "layout_preferences"
private val Context.dataStore: DataStore<Preferences> by preferencesDataStore(
    name = LAYOUT_PREFERENCE_NAME
)

class DessertReleaseApplication : Application() {
}
```

- Inside the DessertReleaseApplication class body, create a lateinit var instance of the UserPreferencesRepository.
- Override the onCreate() method.
- Inside the onCreate() method, initialize userPreferencesRepository by constructing a UserPreferencesRepository with dataStore as its parameter.


```kotlin
private const val LAYOUT_PREFERENCE_NAME = "layout_preferences"

private val Context.dataStore: DataStore<Preferences> by preferencesDataStore(
    name = LAYOUT_PREFERENCE_NAME
)

class DessertReleaseApplication : Application() {
    lateinit var userPreferencesRepository: UserPreferencesRepository

    override fun onCreate() {
        super.onCreate()
        userPreferencesRepository = UserPreferencesRepository(dataStore)
    }
}
```
[ View Full Code --> ](./app/src/main/java/dizzcode/com/dessertrelease/DessertReleaseApplication.kt)


- Add the following line inside the <application> tag in the AndroidManifest.xml file.

```xml
<application
android:name=".DessertReleaseApplication"

</application>
```


<br>  

#
### 1.7 Use the UserPreferencesRepository

Provide the repository to the ViewModel

- Now that the UserPreferencesRepository is available through dependency injection, you can use it in DessertReleaseViewModel.
- In the DessertReleaseViewModel, create a UserPreferencesRepository property as a constructor parameter.
- 

```kotlin
class DessertReleaseViewModel(
    private val userPreferencesRepository: UserPreferencesRepository
) : ViewModel() {
    // ...
}
```
[ View Full Code --> ](./app/src/main/java/dizzcode/com/dessertrelease/ui/DessertReleaseViewModel.kt)

<br>

- Within the ViewModel's companion object, in the viewModelFactory initializer block, obtain an instance of the DessertReleaseApplication using the following code.
- Create an instance of the DessertReleaseViewModel and pass the userPreferencesRepository.

```kotlin
companion object {
    val Factory: ViewModelProvider.Factory = viewModelFactory {
        initializer {
            val application = (this[APPLICATION_KEY] as DessertReleaseApplication)
            DessertReleaseViewModel(application.userPreferencesRepository)
        }
    }
}
```
[ View Full Code --> ](./app/src/main/java/dizzcode/com/dessertrelease/ui/DessertReleaseViewModel.kt)

- The UserPreferencesRepository is now accessible by the ViewModel.

<br>  

#
### 1.8 Store the layout preference

- Edit selectLayout() in DessertReleaseViewModel to access the preferences repository and update the layout preference. Start a coroutine to call the saveLayoutPreference() function asynchronously.

```kotlin
fun selectLayout(isLinearLayout: Boolean) {
    viewModelScope.launch {
        userPreferencesRepository.saveLayoutPreference(isLinearLayout)
    }
}
```
[ View Full Code --> ](./app/src/main/java/dizzcode/com/dessertrelease/ui/DessertReleaseViewModel.kt)

<br>  

#
### 1.9 Read the layout preference

Refactor uiState: StateFlow in the ViewModel to reflect the isLinearLayout: Flow from the repository.

- Delete the uiState initialization with MutableStateFlow(DessertReleaseUiState).

- Use the map() function on the isLinearLayout Flow to convert it into a UI state.

- Return a DessertReleaseUiState instance with the isLinearLayout Boolean to update the UI.

Since isLinearLayout is a cold Flow, convert it to a hot StateFlow using stateIn().   
Pass viewModelScope, SharingStarted.WhileSubscribed(5_000), and DessertReleaseUiState() as parameters to stateIn().

> Initial Code
```kotlin
val uiState: StateFlow<DessertReleaseUiState> = _uiState
```

<br>

> Modified Code
```kotlin
val uiState: StateFlow<DessertReleaseUiState> =
    userPreferencesRepository.isLinearLayout.map { isLinearLayout ->
        DessertReleaseUiState(isLinearLayout)
    }
        .stateIn(
            scope = viewModelScope,
            started = SharingStarted.WhileSubscribed(5_000),
            initialValue = DessertReleaseUiState()
        )
```
[ View Full Code --> ](./app/src/main/java/dizzcode/com/dessertrelease/ui/DessertReleaseViewModel.kt)

#
### Try toggling the layout and closing the app. Reopen the app and notice that your layout preference was saved.
#
<br>

#

<kbd>[&nbsp; ► &nbsp;  BACK TO Project Notes  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;](#ᴠɪ--ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ-ɴᴏᴛᴇꜱ) </kbd>

____


<br>

<hr>
<div align="center">

<kbd>[&nbsp; ⮝ &nbsp;  BACK TO TOP  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;](#ɪ----ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ-ɪɴꜰᴏ) </kbd>
</div>
<hr>
<br>

Commit message:

Stage 1 - Document completed implement DataStore functions to the project

README.md, after:

<h1 align="center" >  Dessert Release App  <br> [ ᴀɴᴅʀᴏɪᴅ ♾ ᴅᴇᴍᴏ ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ ]</h1>

## ɪ  ⁃  ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ ɪɴꜰᴏ

The Dessert Release app is a simple app which displays a collection of Android dessert releases. This app is used to teach the concept of Preferences DataStore.
<br>

<div align="center">

⁃ ᴄᴏɴᴛᴇɴᴛꜱ ⁃  
[ᴜꜱᴇʀ ꜰᴇᴀᴛᴜʀᴇꜱ](#ɪɪ--ᴡʜᴀᴛ-ᴜꜱᴇʀꜱ-ᴄᴀɴ-ᴇxᴘᴇᴄᴛ)
| [ᴀᴘᴘ ꜱᴄʀᴇᴇɴꜱ](#ɪɪɪ--ᴠɪꜱᴜᴀʟ-ᴛᴏᴜʀ-ᴏꜰ-ᴛʜᴇ-ᴀᴘᴘ-ꜱᴄʀᴇᴇɴꜱ)
| [ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ ʙʀᴀɴᴄʜᴇꜱ](#ɪᴠ--ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ-ʙʀᴀɴᴄʜᴇꜱ)
| [ᴅᴇᴠ ꜰᴇᴀᴛᴜʀᴇꜱ](#ᴠ--ʙᴇʜɪɴᴅ-ᴛʜᴇ-ᴄᴏᴅᴇ-ᴅᴇᴠ-ꜰᴇᴀᴛᴜʀᴇꜱ)
| [ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ ɴᴏᴛᴇꜱ](#ᴠɪ--ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ-ɴᴏᴛᴇꜱ)

<br>
<br>

[![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/-Android%20|%20Platform-2E8B57?logo=android&logoColor=white&style=for-the-badge)](#)
[![Language](https://img.shields.io/badge/-Kotlin%20|%20Language-%2307405e?logo=kotlin&logoColor=white&style=for-the-badge)](#)

[![MIN API LEVEL](https://img.shields.io/badge/-MIN%20SDK%20|%2024-1C1E24?logo=planetscale&logoColor=00C7B7&style=for-the-badge)](#)
[![Target Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/-Target%20SDK%20|%2034-1C1E24?logo=planetscale&logoColor=00C7B7&style=for-the-badge)](#)
[![Architecture](https://img.shields.io/badge/-Architecture%20|%20MVI-1C1E24?logo=planetscale&logoColor=00C7B7&style=for-the-badge)](#)
[![UI](https://img.shields.io/badge/-UI%20|%20Jetpack%20Compose-1C1E24?logo=planetscale&logoColor=00C7B7&style=for-the-badge)](#)

<br>
<br>
<img
    src="./screenshots/alpha_main.png"
    width="340" height="720" 
/>

<br>

</div>


## ɪɪ ⁃ ᴡʜᴀᴛ ᴜꜱᴇʀꜱ ᴄᴀɴ ᴇxᴘᴇᴄᴛ

### ⭓ Features


1. View Dessert Collection: Users can browse a collection of dessert releases.


2.  Switch Layout: Users can toggle between grid and list views to customize how the desserts are displayed.


3.  Save Layout Preference: The app remembers the user's preferred layout (grid or list) for future sessions.


4. Responsive Design: UI adapts seamlessly to different screen sizes and orientations.


5.  Smooth Transitions: Visual effects when switching between views (grid/list).



##
### ⭓ Requirements
- Android 7.0 and Above
- Min SDK version 24


##
### ⭓ Permissions
- N/A

<hr>

## ɪɪɪ ⁃ ᴠɪꜱᴜᴀʟ ᴛᴏᴜʀ ᴏꜰ ᴛʜᴇ ᴀᴘᴘ: ꜱᴄʀᴇᴇɴꜱ

<p align="center">
<img 
  src="./screenshots/alpha_main.png" 
   width="200" height="460" 
  />
<img 
  src="./screenshots/screenshot_main.png" 
  width="200" height="460" 
  />
</p>



#
<div align="center">


![forthebadge](https://forthebadge.com/images/badges/built-with-love.svg)
![ForTheBadge ANDROID](https://forthebadge.com/images/badges/built-for-android.svg)
![ForTheBadge GIT](https://forthebadge.com/images/badges/uses-git.svg)

  <br>

<kbd>[&nbsp; ⮝ &nbsp;  BACK TO TOP  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;](#ɪ----ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ-ɪɴꜰᴏ) </kbd>
</div>


#
## ɪᴠ ⁃ ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ ʙʀᴀɴᴄʜᴇꜱ

<!-- Main / Master / Production Branch -->

> <samp> **PRODUCTION BRANCH :**  </samp>  
> Stable code for deployment  
> ➲ [main][branch-main]

> <samp> **STAGING BRANCH :**  </samp>  
> `FLOW | Staging → Production`  
> For pre-release testing, which ensures that the code is stable, bug-free, and ready for deployment.  
> ➲ [staging][branch-staging]

> <samp> **DEVELOPMENT BRANCH :**  </samp>  
> `FLOW | Development → Release → Staging → Production`  
> Active codebase for ongoing development efforts  (New features, bug fixes, and improvements..)  
> ➲ [development][branch-development]



> <samp> **FEATURE BRANCHES :** N/A  </samp>  
> `FLOW | Feature → Development → Release → Staging → Production`  
<!-- 
> <samp> **FEATURE BRANCHES :**  </samp>  
> For Isolated feature development (Ensures changes are tested and reviewed before merging into the main workflow)  
>   
> feature/  
> ➲ dark-theme  
> ➲ offline-db-impl
-->


> <samp> **RELEASE BRANCHES :** N/A  </samp>  
> `FLOW | Release → Staging → Production`  
<!-- 
> <samp> **RELEASE BRANCHES :**  </samp>  
> Prepares the code for final testing and deployment in a new version release.
>   
> release/  
> ➲ version-number
-->



> <samp> **HOTFIX BRANCHES :** N/A  </samp>  
> `FLOW | Hotfix → Staging → Production`  
<!-- 
> <samp> **HOTFIX BRANCHES :**  </samp>  
> Handles critical fixes in production that need immediate resolution.
>   
> hotfix/  
> ➲ main-screen-crash 
-->


> <samp> **BUGFIX BRANCHES :** N/A  </samp>  
> `FLOW | Bugfix → Development → Release → Staging → Production` 
<!-- 
> <samp> **BUGFIX BRANCHES :**  </samp>  
> Addresses specific bugs identified during development and testing.
>   
> bugfix/  
> ➲ main-screen-error
-->

<!-- 
> <samp> **EXPERIMENTAL BRANCHES :** N/A  </samp>  

> <samp> **EXPERIMENTAL BRANCHES :**  </samp>  
> Facilitates trial and error to test new ideas and concepts.
>   
> experiment/  
> ➲ main-screen-change-colours
-->
<!-- Experimental → Feature → Development → Release → Staging → Main/Production   -->


[branch-main]:  https://github.com/dizzcode/inventory-android-test-app/tree/main
[branch-development]:  https://github.com/dizzcode/inventory-android-test-app/tree/development
[branch-staging]:  https://github.com/dizzcode/inventory-android-test-app/tree/staging

[branch-feature-NAME]:  https://github.com/dizzcode/inventory-android-test-app/tree/staging

[branch-hotfix-NAME]:  https://github.com/dizzcode/inventory-android-test-app/tree/staging

[branch-bugfix-NAME]:  https://github.com/dizzcode/inventory-android-test-app/tree/staging

<br>  


#
## ᴠ ⁃ ʙᴇʜɪɴᴅ ᴛʜᴇ ᴄᴏᴅᴇ: ᴅᴇᴠ ꜰᴇᴀᴛᴜʀᴇꜱ

### ⭓ App Dependencies/Libraries Overview

<br>

* [Kotlin][0] : Kotlin is statically typed & first-class language for Android Development.
* [Coroutines][1] : For Asynchronus or non-blocking operations.
* [Flows][2] : Data Streaming API which is built on top of Coroutines.
* [Jetpack Compose][3] : Toolkit for building native UI in a declarative way.
* [Room][4] : Save data in a local database using Room
* [Retrofit][5] : Type-safe REST client for Android to consume RESTful web services.
* [Dagger Hilt][6] : Dependency injection library for Android.
* [Kotlin DSL][7] : For writing gradle script for Kotlin is more readable and offers better compile-time.

[0]:  https://kotlinlang.org/
[1]:  https://kotlinlang.org/docs/coroutines-overview.html
[2]:  https://developer.android.com/kotlin/flow
[3]:  https://developer.android.com/jetpack/compose
[4]:  https://developer.android.com/training/data-storage/room
[5]:  https://github.com/square/retrofit
[6]:  https://dagger.dev/hilt/
[7]:  https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/kotlin_dsl.html


#
### ⭓ Features

1. Jetpack DataStore &nbsp;|&nbsp;  [ More-> ](#1-jetpack-datastore)  

    1.1 How to add DataStore library to the app  
    1.2 Implement the user preferences repository  
    1.3 Write to the DataStore  
    1.4 Read from the DataStore  
    1.5 Exception handling  
    1.6 Initialize the DataStore  
    1.7 Use the UserPreferencesRepository  
    1.8 Store the layout preference  
    1.9 Read the layout preference  


<br>
<br>  
<br>  

#
<div align="center">

<kbd>[&nbsp; ⮝ &nbsp;  BACK TO TOP  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;](#ɪ----ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ-ɪɴꜰᴏ) </kbd>
</div>

#
# ᴠɪ ⁃ ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ ɴᴏᴛᴇꜱ

<br> 

____

## 1. Jetpack DataStore

Jetpack DataStore is a data storage solution from the Android Jetpack libraries, designed to replace the SharedPreferences API.

#
### 1.1 How to add DataStore library to the app

Set up dependencies | inside `build.gradle.kts` (Module :app)

```kotlin
//DataStore
implementation("androidx.datastore:datastore-preferences:1.0.0")
```

<br>  

#
### 1.2 Implement the user preferences repository

- In the `data` package, create a new class called `UserPreferencesRepository.kt`
- In the `UserPreferencesRepository` constructor, define a private value property to represent a `DataStore` object instance with a `Preferences` type.

```kotlin
class UserPreferencesRepository(
    private val dataStore: DataStore<Preferences>
){
}
```

#
> [!IMPORTANT]  
> Make sure to use the `androidx.datastore.preferences.core.Preferences` import for the Preferences class.
> #
> DataStore stores key-value pairs. To access a value you must define a key.
> #

<br>

- Create a `companion object` inside the UserPreferencesRepository class.
- Use the `booleanPreferencesKey()` function to define a key and pass it the name is_linear_layout. 
  - Similar to SQL table names, the key needs to use an underscore format. 
  - This key is used to access a boolean value indicating whether the linear layout should be shown.

```kotlin
class UserPreferencesRepository(
    private val dataStore: DataStore<Preferences>
){
    private companion object {
        val IS_LINEAR_LAYOUT = booleanPreferencesKey("is_linear_layout")
    }
    // ...
}
```

<br>  

#
### 1.3 Write to the DataStore

- You create and modify the values within a DataStore by passing a lambda to the `edit()` method.
The lambda is passed an instance of MutablePreferences, which you can use to update values in the DataStore.
- All the updates inside this lambda are executed as a single transaction.
  - Put another way, the update is atomic - it happens all at one time. This type of update prevents a situation in which some values update but others do not. 

<br>

- Create a suspend function and call it saveLayoutPreference().

- In the saveLayoutPreference() function, call the edit() method on the dataStore object.

- To make your code more readable, define a name for the MutablePreferences provided in the lambda body. Use that property to set a value with the key you defined and the boolean passed to the saveLayoutPreference() function.

```kotlin
suspend fun saveLayoutPreference(isLinearLayout: Boolean) {
    dataStore.edit { preferences ->
        preferences[IS_LINEAR_LAYOUT] = isLinearLayout
    }
}
```

#
> [!IMPORTANT]  
> #
> The value does not exist in DataStore until this function is called and the value is set.  
> By setting up the key-value pair in the edit() method,  
> the value is defined and initialized until the app's cache or data is cleared.
> #


<br>  

#
### 1.4 Read from the DataStore

Now that you have created a way to write isLinearLayout into dataStore, take the following steps to read it:

- Create a property in UserPreferencesRepository of type Flow<Boolean> called isLinearLayout.
- You can use the DataStore.data property to expose DataStore values. Set isLinearLayout to the data property of the DataStore object.
- Use the map function to convert the Flow<Preferences> into a Flow<Boolean>.
- Specify true to default to the linear layout view.
- 
```kotlin
val isLinearLayout: Flow<Boolean> = dataStore.data.map { preferences ->
    preferences[IS_LINEAR_LAYOUT] ?: true
}
```

#
> [!NOTE]
> #
>  The Preferences object contains all the key-value pairs in the DataStore.  
> Each time the data in the DataStore is updated, a new Preferences object is emitted into the Flow.
> #
> Remember that until the preference is defined and initialized, it does not exist in the DataStore.  
> That is why you must programmatically confirm that the preference exists and provide a default value if it does not.
> #

<br>  

#
### 1.5 Exception handling

File system interactions can fail, such as missing files or full/unmounted disks. DataStore read/write operations may trigger IOExceptions. Use the catch{} operator to handle these failures

- In the companion object, implement an immutable TAG string property to use for logging.

```kotlin
suspend fun saveLayoutPreference(isLinearLayout: Boolean) {
    dataStore.edit { preferences ->
        preferences[IS_LINEAR_LAYOUT] = isLinearLayout
        const val TAG = "UserPreferencesRepo" //Added
    }
}
```

<br>

- Preferences DataStore throws an IOException when an error is encountered while reading data. In the isLinearLayout initialization block, before map(), use the catch{}operator to catch the IOException.

```kotlin
val isLinearLayout: Flow<Boolean> = dataStore.data
    .catch {} //Added
    .map { preferences ->
        preferences[IS_LINEAR_LAYOUT] ?: true
    }
```
<br>

- In the catch block, if there is an IOexception, log the error and emit emptyPreferences(). If a different type of exception is thrown, prefer re-throwing that exception. By emitting emptyPreferences() if there is an error, the map function can still map to the default value.

```kotlin
val isLinearLayout: Flow<Boolean> = dataStore.data
    .catch { // -------------- Added
        if(it is IOException) {
            Log.e(TAG, "Error reading preferences.", it)
            emit(emptyPreferences())
        } else {
            throw it
        }
    } // -------------- Added
    .map { preferences ->
        preferences[IS_LINEAR_LAYOUT] ?: true
    }
```
[ View Full Code --> ](./app/src/main/java/dizzcode/com/dessertrelease/data/local/UserPreferencesRepository.kt)

<br>  

#
### 1.6 Initialize the DataStore

In this project, you must handle the dependency injection manually.  
Therefore, you must manually provide the UserPreferencesRepository class with a Preferences DataStore.  
Follow these steps to inject DataStore into the UserPreferencesRepository.

- Find the dessertrelease package.


- Within this directory, create a new class called DessertReleaseApplication and implement the Application class. This is the container for your DataStore.

```kotlin
class DessertReleaseApplication: Application() {
}
```

- In DessertReleaseApplication.kt, declare a private const val LAYOUT_PREFERENCE_NAME outside the class and set its value to "layout_preferences" for use in the Preferences Datastore.


- In DessertReleaseApplication.kt, outside the DessertReleaseApplication class, create a private DataStore<Preferences> property called Context.dataStore using the preferencesDataStore delegate, and pass LAYOUT_PREFERENCE_NAME as the name parameter.

```kotlin
//Added
private const val LAYOUT_PREFERENCE_NAME = "layout_preferences"
private val Context.dataStore: DataStore<Preferences> by preferencesDataStore(
    name = LAYOUT_PREFERENCE_NAME
)

class DessertReleaseApplication : Application() {
}
```

- Inside the DessertReleaseApplication class body, create a lateinit var instance of the UserPreferencesRepository.
- Override the onCreate() method.
- Inside the onCreate() method, initialize userPreferencesRepository by constructing a UserPreferencesRepository with dataStore as its parameter.


```kotlin
private const val LAYOUT_PREFERENCE_NAME = "layout_preferences"

private val Context.dataStore: DataStore<Preferences> by preferencesDataStore(
    name = LAYOUT_PREFERENCE_NAME
)

class DessertReleaseApplication : Application() {
    lateinit var userPreferencesRepository: UserPreferencesRepository

    override fun onCreate() {
        super.onCreate()
        userPreferencesRepository = UserPreferencesRepository(dataStore)
    }
}
```
[ View Full Code --> ](./app/src/main/java/dizzcode/com/dessertrelease/DessertReleaseApplication.kt)


- Add the following line inside the <application> tag in the AndroidManifest.xml file.

```xml
<application
android:name=".DessertReleaseApplication"

</application>
```


<br>  

#
### 1.7 Use the UserPreferencesRepository

Provide the repository to the ViewModel

- Now that the UserPreferencesRepository is available through dependency injection, you can use it in DessertReleaseViewModel.
- In the DessertReleaseViewModel, create a UserPreferencesRepository property as a constructor parameter.
- 

```kotlin
class DessertReleaseViewModel(
    private val userPreferencesRepository: UserPreferencesRepository
) : ViewModel() {
    // ...
}
```
[ View Full Code --> ](./app/src/main/java/dizzcode/com/dessertrelease/ui/DessertReleaseViewModel.kt)

<br>

- Within the ViewModel's companion object, in the viewModelFactory initializer block, obtain an instance of the DessertReleaseApplication using the following code.
- Create an instance of the DessertReleaseViewModel and pass the userPreferencesRepository.

```kotlin
companion object {
    val Factory: ViewModelProvider.Factory = viewModelFactory {
        initializer {
            val application = (this[APPLICATION_KEY] as DessertReleaseApplication)
            DessertReleaseViewModel(application.userPreferencesRepository)
        }
    }
}
```
[ View Full Code --> ](./app/src/main/java/dizzcode/com/dessertrelease/ui/DessertReleaseViewModel.kt)

- The UserPreferencesRepository is now accessible by the ViewModel.

<br>  

#
### 1.8 Store the layout preference

- Edit selectLayout() in DessertReleaseViewModel to access the preferences repository and update the layout preference. Start a coroutine to call the saveLayoutPreference() function asynchronously.

```kotlin
fun selectLayout(isLinearLayout: Boolean) {
    viewModelScope.launch {
        userPreferencesRepository.saveLayoutPreference(isLinearLayout)
    }
}
```
[ View Full Code --> ](./app/src/main/java/dizzcode/com/dessertrelease/ui/DessertReleaseViewModel.kt)

<br>  

#
### 1.9 Read the layout preference

Refactor uiState: StateFlow in the ViewModel to reflect the isLinearLayout: Flow from the repository.

- Delete the uiState initialization with MutableStateFlow(DessertReleaseUiState).

- Use the map() function on the isLinearLayout Flow to convert it into a UI state.

- Return a DessertReleaseUiState instance with the isLinearLayout Boolean to update the UI.

Since isLinearLayout is a cold Flow, convert it to a hot StateFlow using stateIn().   
Pass viewModelScope, SharingStarted.WhileSubscribed(5_000), and DessertReleaseUiState() as parameters to stateIn().

> Initial Code
```kotlin
val uiState: StateFlow<DessertReleaseUiState> = _uiState
```

<br>

> Modified Code
```kotlin
val uiState: StateFlow<DessertReleaseUiState> =
    userPreferencesRepository.isLinearLayout.map { isLinearLayout ->
        DessertReleaseUiState(isLinearLayout)
    }
        .stateIn(
            scope = viewModelScope,
            started = SharingStarted.WhileSubscribed(5_000),
            initialValue = DessertReleaseUiState()
        )
```
[ View Full Code --> ](./app/src/main/java/dizzcode/com/dessertrelease/ui/DessertReleaseViewModel.kt)

#
### Try toggling the layout and closing the app. Reopen the app and notice that your layout preference was saved.
#
<br>

#

<kbd>[&nbsp; ► &nbsp;  BACK TO Project Notes  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;](#ᴠɪ--ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ-ɴᴏᴛᴇꜱ) </kbd>

____


<br>

<hr>
<div align="center">

<kbd>[&nbsp; ⮝ &nbsp;  BACK TO TOP  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;](#ɪ----ᴘʀᴏᴊᴇᴄᴛ-ɪɴꜰᴏ) </kbd>
</div>
<hr>
<br>
